NMS-10710: Move filter rule documenation to admin guide (#3509)
OpenNMS/opennms: docs/modules/reference/pages/configuration/filters/filters.adoc

You will get a syntax exception if it sees any non-visible columns in the rule. 
The same applies to a non-visible column in a table.

A <join> tag tells the filter module how to relate this table to the ipinterface table. 
The ipinterface table is marked with the attribute "key=primary", meaning that it is going to be the table we select ipaddr from and join all other tables to.

=== Operators

You can use C/Java-style comparison operators with data types they apply to.
(You can use == and != on strings, as well as the SQL "LIKE" keyword.)

For LIKE comparisons, the character "_" matches any single character and "%" matches any series of characters (or none at all). 
For example, "F_o%"" matches "Foo", "Foom", and "Flowers" but not "Foip".

To handle NULL values (which include cases where you've joined across to a table where there is no matching row), use the "IS NULL" and "IS NOT NULL" operators. 
Note that comparing a null value to anything with any other operator always returns false, so 
`categoryName != 'SomeCategory'` will not return anything with a null categoryName. 

> Instead, you probably need to use `categoryName != 'SomeCategory' | categoryName IS NULL`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You would need to use `categoryName != 'SomeCategory' | categoryName IS NULL` to exclude all nodes that are tagged with 'SomeCategory'.
```

If a table has an attribute of "visible=false", then none of the columns in that table can be used in the WHERE clause and thus cannot appear in the rule. 
You will get a syntax exception if it sees any non-visible columns in the rule. 
The same applies to a non-visible column in a table.

A <join> tag tells the filter module how to relate this table to the ipinterface table. 
The ipinterface table is marked with the attribute "key=primary", meaning that it is going to be the table we select ipaddr from and join all other tables to.

=== Operators

You can use C/Java-style comparison operators with data types they apply to.
(You can use == and != on strings, as well as the SQL "LIKE" keyword.)

For LIKE comparisons, the character "_" matches any single character and "%" matches any series of characters (or none at all). 
For example, "F_o%"" matches "Foo", "Foom", and "Flowers" but not "Foip".

To handle NULL values (which include cases where you've joined across to a table where there is no matching row), use the "IS NULL" and "IS NOT NULL" operators. 
Note that comparing a null value to anything with any other operator always returns false, so 

> `<pre>categoryName != 'SomeCategory'</pre>` will not return anything with a null categoryName. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`categoryName != 'SomeCategory'` will not return anything with a null categoryName. 
```

> Instead, you probably need to use `<pre>categoryName != 'SomeCategory' | categoryName IS NULL</pre>`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Instead, you probably need to use `categoryName != 'SomeCategory' | categoryName IS NULL`.
```

You can use parentheses to group expressions and can apply boolean operators anywhere in an expression. 
Note that, in a departure from C/Java convention, boolean operators are single characters rather than double, so they look more like the bitwise arithmetic operators in C:

> image:configuration/bitwise.png[bitwise, 100]

Reviewer: Do we need to include this as an image, or can this be converted to plaintext for the bitwise examples?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[options="header, autowidth"]
|===
| Operator | Bitwise Expression
| AND      | `&`
| OR       | `|`
| NOT      | `!`
```

Author: > Do we need to include this as an image, or can this be converted to plaintext for the bitwise examples?

It doesn't need to be an image. I wasn't sure if the formatting of the bitwise examples was important. It's difficult to get the indentation correct.

Each comparision is joined together with the & or | operators meaning logical AND, logical OR operations. 
Anything delimited by an & or | character gets translated into a sub-select that selects the ipaddr based on the comparision for that clause. 

NOTE: Depending on the format you use in your rules, you might need to escape your AND operator. 
See xref:configuration/filters/rule-formats.adoc#filter-rule-format[Rule_formats].

Here is an example:

Rule:

> `<pre>(nodesysname == 'something') & (snmpifdescr == 'something else')</pre>`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`(nodesysname == 'something') & (snmpifdescr == 'something else')`
```

SQL

[source, sql]
----

> <pre>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> <pre>

Reviewer 2: The included example query doesn't actually work :) This is the exact (working) query executed by this filter:

```suggestion
<pre>
SELECT DISTINCT ipInterface.ipAddr 
FROM ipInterface 
JOIN node ON (ipInterface.nodeID = node.nodeID) 
JOIN snmpInterface ON (ipInterface.snmpinterfaceid = snmpInterface.id) 
WHERE (node.nodesysname = 'something') 
AND (snmpInterface.snmpifdescr = 'something else') 
LIMIT 1
</pre>
```

Reviewer: Though the `<pre>` tags shouldn't be there for Antora.

SELECT ipaddr
FROM ipinterface
WHERE ipaddr in (SELECT ipaddr FROM ipinterface, node
                 WHERE nodesysname='something'
                 AND ipinterface.nodeid =node.nodeid)
AND   ipaddr in (SELECT ipaddr FROM ipinterface, snmpInterface
                 WHERE snmpifdescr='something else'
                 AND ipinterface.ipaddr = snmpInterface.ipaddr);

> </pre>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

----

The IPLIKE function is shorthand to call a PostgreSQL function that was written in C to compare ipaddresses using *, lists, and ranges. 

> is<Service> is shorthand to build a complicated join to match on a service name.  

Reviewer: The format was a little confusing on my first read.  Can we use: \`isService\` and \`notisService\` instead of the < >?

Author: absolutely.

> is<Service> is shorthand to build a complicated join to match on a service name.  

Author: ```suggestion
isService is shorthand to build a complicated join to match on a service name.  
```

> notis<Service> is also available. 

Author: ```suggestion
notisService is also available. 
```

[[filters]]
= Filters

A filter (also known as a rule) is a shorthand expression that allows you to select IP addresses from the ipinterface table.
The rule builds the WHERE clause of a SQL query. 
The https://github.com/OpenNMS/opennms/blob/develop/opennms-config/src/main/resources/database-schema.xml[database-schema.xml] file in the `/opt/opennms/etc` directory informs the filter parser which tables can be used in an expression.

== Explanation of database-schema.xml file

Each table the filter code uses appears in a `<table>` tag. 

> If a table has an attribute of "visible=false", then none of the columns in that table can be used in the WHERE clause and thus cannot appear in the rule. 

Reviewer 2: Quotes here look wrong to me, but I don't know what actually conforms to style.
```suggestion
If a table has an attribute of `visible=false`, then none of the columns in that table can be used in the WHERE clause and thus cannot appear in the rule. 
```

Author: In this case you are correct. I didn't consider this as a literal attribute, which is why I did the double-quotes. Since it is we want it to appear the way you've corrected it.

You will get a syntax exception if it sees any non-visible columns in the rule. 
The same applies to a non-visible column in a table.

A `<join>` tag tells the filter module how to relate this table to the ipinterface table. 

=== Operators

You can use C/Java-style comparison operators with data types they apply to.

> (You can use == and != on strings, as well as the SQL "LIKE" keyword.)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
(You can use `==` and `!=` on strings, as well as the SQL `LIKE` keyword.)
```
And here.

For LIKE comparisons, the character "_" matches any single character and "%" matches any series of characters (or none at all). 
For example, "F_o%"" matches "Foo", "Foom", and "Flowers" but not "Foip".

> To handle NULL values (which include cases where you've joined across to a table where there is no matching row), use the "IS NULL" and "IS NOT NULL" operators. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To handle NULL values (which include cases where you've joined across to a table where there is no matching row), use the `IS NULL` and `IS NOT NULL` operators. 
```

This, too.

Comparing a null value to anything with any other operator always returns false, so `categoryName != 'SomeCategory'` will not return anything with a null categoryName. 
Instead, you would need to use `categoryName != 'SomeCategory' | categoryName IS NULL` to exclude all nodes that are tagged with `SomeCategory`.

You can use parentheses to group expressions and can apply boolean operators anywhere in an expression. 
NOTE: In a departure from C/Java convention, boolean operators are single characters rather than double, so they look more like the bitwise arithmetic operators in C:

[options="header, autowidth"]
|===
| Operator | Bitwise Expression
| AND      | &amp;
| OR       | \|
| NOT      | !
|===

> Each comparision is joined together with the & or | operators meaning logical AND, logical OR operations. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Each comparision is joined together with the `&` or `|` operators meaning logical AND, logical OR operations. 
```

> Anything delimited by an & or | character gets translated into a sub-select that selects IP addresses based on the comparison for that clause. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Anything delimited by an `&` or `|` character gets translated into a sub-select that selects IP addresses based on the comparison for that clause. 
```

[[filters]]
= Filters

> A filter (also known as a rule) is a shorthand SQL statement that automatically selects ipaddr from the ipinterface table. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A filter (also known as a rule) is a shorthand expression that allows you to select IP addresses from the ipinterface table.
```

> The rule you write builds the WHERE clause. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The rule is used to build the WHERE clause of a SQL query.
```

Author: ```suggestion
The rule builds the WHERE clause of a SQL query. 
```

> The https://github.com/OpenNMS/opennms/blob/develop/opennms-config/src/main/resources/database-schema.xml[database-schema.xml] file in the /opt/opennms/etc directory informs the filter code the tables it can use to build the WHERE clause.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The https://github.com/OpenNMS/opennms/blob/develop/opennms-config/src/main/resources/database-schema.xml[database-schema.xml] file in the `/opt/opennms/etc` directory informs the filter parser which tables can used in an expression.
```

Author: ```suggestion
The https://github.com/OpenNMS/opennms/blob/develop/opennms-config/src/main/resources/database-schema.xml[database-schema.xml] file in the `/opt/opennms/etc` directory informs the filter parser which tables can be used in an expression.
```

== Explanation of database-schema.xml file

> Each table the filter code uses appears in a <table> tag. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Each table the filter code uses appears in a `<table>` tag. 
```

If a table has an attribute of "visible=false", then none of the columns in that table can be used in the WHERE clause and thus cannot appear in the rule. 
You will get a syntax exception if it sees any non-visible columns in the rule. 
The same applies to a non-visible column in a table.

> A <join> tag tells the filter module how to relate this table to the ipinterface table. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A `<join>` tag tells the filter module how to relate this table to the ipinterface table. 
```

> The ipinterface table is marked with the attribute "key=primary", meaning that it is going to be the table we select ipaddr from and join all other tables to.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

=== Operators

You can use C/Java-style comparison operators with data types they apply to.
(You can use == and != on strings, as well as the SQL "LIKE" keyword.)

For LIKE comparisons, the character "_" matches any single character and "%" matches any series of characters (or none at all). 
For example, "F_o%"" matches "Foo", "Foom", and "Flowers" but not "Foip".

To handle NULL values (which include cases where you've joined across to a table where there is no matching row), use the "IS NULL" and "IS NOT NULL" operators. 

> Note that comparing a null value to anything with any other operator always returns false, so 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Comparing a null value to anything with any other operator always returns false, so `categoryName != 'SomeCategory'` will not return anything with a null categoryName. 
```

> `categoryName != 'SomeCategory'` will not return anything with a null categoryName. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Instead, you would need to use `categoryName != 'SomeCategory' | categoryName IS NULL` to exclude all nodes that are tagged with `SomeCategory`.

You can use parentheses to group expressions and can apply boolean operators anywhere in an expression. 

> Note that, in a departure from C/Java convention, boolean operators are single characters rather than double, so they look more like the bitwise arithmetic operators in C:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
NOTE: In a departure from C/Java convention, boolean operators are single characters rather than double, so they look more like the bitwise arithmetic operators in C:
```

[options="header, autowidth"]
|===
| Operator | Bitwise Expression
| AND      | &amp;
| OR       | \|
| NOT      | !
|===

Each comparision is joined together with the & or | operators meaning logical AND, logical OR operations. 

> Anything delimited by an & or | character gets translated into a sub-select that selects the ipaddr based on the comparision for that clause. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Anything delimited by an & or | character gets translated into a sub-select that selects IP addresses based on the comparison for that clause. 
```
